---
post_id: /posts/archive/2013-04-21-nyquist-frequency-of-a-concept/
created_at: '2013-04-22 01:53:33 -0400'
author: Adam
email: aburke3@vt.edu
website: ''
ip: 10.183.252.21
---

I think that this tool is being developed by Google, but they don't know it yet. The same tool they used to develop a system that self identified the concept of cat provides an establishment of a baseline of cat. The more of our lives that we document and feed into the internet, the more information a parallel computing system has to work with. If the entirety of our art, language, music, etc. is online and searchable then we are given an ultimate average image of a concept (brought to you by Google). This is how we could potentially begin developing a metric space. Then if you feed your new way of communicating a concept into the internet it would simultaneously be analyzed and compared to the mean concept and could be given a standard deviation score for effectiveness of communication of a particular concept. 

This is totally made up, so there is a possibility that it would be the entirely wrong way to go about it, but that is all I could think of. 

This still leaves the question of whether it makes sense to talk about a tool like this. I don't know. On one hand, it could potentially tell us a lot about how to effectively communicate, on the other, it could result in a reductive, mechanical classification of ways to effectively communicate. I think the first outcome is more likely. If the google averaging system is truly all encompassing and develops valid concepts then it should be able to accept a wide variety of inputs which we (humans) still find enriching and meaningful on an individual basis. 

Even though we know a phone call isn't a perfect reconstruction it is, as you say, good enough to function. Being face to face would be the optimal experience in that context, but being mind to mind would be "perfect" in a meta sense. Is being mind to mind actually better than the result of sampling that occurs through our communication? You can never know until you try it.