---
post_id: /posts/archive/2012-10-20-response-to-class-material-reposted/
created_at: '2012-10-20 18:43:39 -0400'
author: Matt Whiteman
email: mwhitema@vt.edu
website: ''
ip: 10.183.252.21
---

Learning to do things on the command line is extremely important for a few reasons:

1) You are not always going to have physical access to a computer to use that GUI. It is very common as a developer to remotely access servers for development and debugging. As an example, when I worked at Booz Allen, there was a central server offsite where all the developed tools and proprietary data was stored. It was accessed by members of the team by connecting via SSH and doing everything over the command line, including debugging the production application and developing and running batch scripts to parse remote data. It would not have been feasible to have people either go to the computer's location all the time to do work, nor to have multiple people running full remote desktop to get GUI access.

2) As developers, we are going to need to write complicated scripts, as well as writing applications that make external calls to the OS. To accomplish either of these, knowledge of command line operations is needed.

3) A lot of tasks are either easier by doing them from the command line than trying to use a GUI, or too expansive in terms of computing power to utilize a GUI, especially in cases with text parsing or stringing together multiple commands. If you need to do a search on huge amounts of log files, or a replacement of a string of text again on numerous amounts of files, which is easier: find/grep/sed, even if the command looks ugly, or trying to manually load up these files into a GUI editor (or even worse, trying to script running a GUI tool and automating the actions).