---
author: Ben
email: bwr@vt.edu
created_at: 2013-04-10 01:35:00.000000000 -04:00
post_id: /posts/archive/2013-04-09-todo-make-ece2524-obsolete/
---


Sometimes I feel really lost here at Virginia Tech. About a year ago, this progressed to the point that I tried to transfer somewhere else.

I look at the course catalogs for ECE, CS, Philosophy, Math, and Physics and I don’t see a single course title or description that sounds boring. I buy textbooks and read them for fun, even when I’m not in the classes. I take online courses related to the subject matter. I do side projects that involve course material. Each of these things has only ever increased my intellectual appetites.

And yet, somehow nearly all of my professors manage to douse them. Honestly, I believe that most professors don’t care about even *what* they teach, let alone *how* they teach. Signals and Systems is a really good example of this.

I just want to express to you that your class was easily in the top three I’ve taken here, and it wasn’t because I came in as a Linux user. It was because of how thoughtfully everything was laid out, and how much sense the curriculum made. I think I may not have given you this impression (and, thinking back, I may have given the opposite impression), but I believe that many students (and, certainly, I) really appreciate the amount of effort that you put into teaching this class. If universities were populated by Darren clones, I would feel much more confident that my degree will retain its value fifty years from now.
