---
author: James
email: fgjames9@vt.edu
created_at: 2013-04-11 01:30:00.000000000 -04:00
post_id: /posts/archive/2013-04-09-todo-make-ece2524-obsolete/
---


My main gripe with ECE is the lack of structure, specifically with the CPE degree. It’s not just this class, it’s the entire curriculum. It bounces between EE and CS, only really coming to a focal point when it hits Embedded (ECE 4534), but even then that’s only one class (capstone or no capstone). I like what I’m learning, but the amount of work I’m given that I just don’t care about cuts into my time in doing things relevant to what I want be doing later in life. I want to do programming and digital design work, not EE and Economics (two classes that have eaten up disproportionate amounts of my time), but they’re required classes that I have to take. I’m not really interested in them, and beyond them, once I hit the actually ECE classes, it’s just a mess. It goes from making circuits to programming Qt to Digital Design. I know CPE is a broad field, but a little more focus would be nice. I don’t want to be stuck doing a bunch of things I hate just so I can get to the small (and I mean small) subsets of classes I want to take. Maybe the ECE department could have different tracks, kind of like what the CS department does? It’d give a bit more order to the CPE degree, and make it so things that we learn actually get reinforced, instead of beings shoved in to make room for something that can be and most likely is completely different. That way, we can work in what’s in this class, into every class. Put it at the forthought of people’s minds when they’re learning it, instead of having it as an afterthought class that the department threw in just because. Think we should start some form of formal request to the ECE department (and how would we go about doing such a thing)?

On side note, examining the action of signals sounds interesting to me, but I never really had enough time to devote to actually doing any of that, and in all honesty, I’m more interested in cryptographic algorithms, parallel processing, and security than signals (no offense to any signals people reading this). Hopefully this summer I’ll have time to get through all of it.
