---
post_id: /posts/archive/2013-01-28-its-a-feature-not-a-bug/
created_at: '2013-04-09 11:36:25 -0400'
author: Daniel Allington
email: danielallington76@gmail.com
website: http://www.danielallington.net
ip: 10.183.252.21
---

I enjoyed reading this (like all your posts), but I wanted to question why you're setting up an opposition between OS X and Linux if it's *nix (rather than just Linux) that you're singing the praises of here. For example:

"It remains to be seen whether or not [*nix] will have a noticeable impact on Microsoft’s stranglehold on the desktop market, unless you consider Apple’s Unix derived OS X as an example."

Why would anyone not consider OS X to be an example of a \*nix? It's not Unix-derived, or even Unix-like: it's an actual, certified Unix. Of course, most OS X users don't know what "\*nix" means, and never dip into the shell. But if a Linux distro ever reaches anything approaching OS X's share of the general computer market, the same will be true for most of its users. Which brings me to the next point...

"The Linux based Android operating system is running on over half the world’s smart phones and quickly overtoke more established contenders such as Apple’s iOS. "

iOS is based on OS X, so the big change happened when iOS overtook BlackBerry OS, not when Android overtook iOS. Yes, iOS is crippled in that you need to have your phone jailbroken to get root access, but the same is true of Android - and necessarily so, because most people quite legitimately don't want what you (correctly) identify as the great thing about *nix, i.e. the power "to complete tasks that were never anticipated by the original designers".

Just sayin'.
