---
title: ! 'I am a Selfish Git: A bit on my teaching philosophy'
created_at: Tue, 26 Feb 2013 04:00:16 +0000
kind: article
published: true
tags:
- ece2524s13
- learning
- programming
- teaching
- Uncategorized
- vtclis13
---

A common observation I encounter from people who have taken my class
is that there is less structure in the assignments than they are used
to, and oftentimes less than they would like. A consequence of this is
that participants do a lot of searching the web for tidbits on syntax
and program idioms for the language _du jour_, a process that can take
time with the wealth of information that is returned by a simple
google search. I could track down some research that shows the benefit
of this "look it up yourself" approach, and it would all be valid and
it is one of the reasons I structure assignments the way I do, but
there is another reason. A more selfish reason. Throughout the term
I'll assign a series of assignments. Details are tweaked each semester
but the general outline is something like:

- read in lines of numbers, one per line, do something with them and
  write out a result number.
- read in lines of structured data, do something with them, write out
  lines of structured data
- spawn a child process, or two, connect them with a pipe (this year I
  will probably integrate the "read in lines" idiom into this
  assignment since I like it so much)

I've done each of these myself of course, and tweaked my own solutions
from year to year and have found a structure for each that I think
works well, is easy to read and is as simple as possible. Often times
my solutions use fewer lines of code than some of the solutions I
receive, which admittedly make my estimates of how long a particular
assignment will be inaccurate. I know some of the assignments end up
taking a lot longer than I anticipate for some, and this can be
extremely frustrating, especially since I know everyone's time is a
precious commodity that must be partitioned across other classes and
personal time too (you _are_making time for play, aren't you?).

I could provide more details in the write-ups. I could say "I tried
algorithm X a number of ways: A, B and C, and settled on B because P,
Q and R". It would save those completing the assignments time and it
would save me time, because on average the results I'd get back for
grading would take up fewer lines of code and be more familiar to
me. And that is why I don't.

If I wrote in the assignment and said "for part A, use method B in
conjunction with idiom X and you can complete this part in 3 lines"
then I can guarantee you that around 99% of the 60 assignments I
received back used method B in conjunction with idiom X in only 3
lines of code. It would be much easier to evaluate: I'd be familiar
with the most common errors when using method B in conjunction with
idiom X and would have made spotting them quickly a reflexive
response.

But I wouldn't learn a thing.

Let me tell you a secret. Sure, I enjoy seeing others learn and
explore new ideas and get excited when they discover they can write
something in 10 lines in Python that took them 30 in C. I really
do. But that's not the only reason I teach. I teach because I learn a
tremendous amount from the process myself. In fact, all that tweaking
I said I've done to my solutions? That was done in response to
reviewing a diverse (sometimes _very_ diverse) set of solutions to the
same problem. Often times I'll get solutions written in a way I would
never have used solving the problem myself, and my first reaction is
something like "why does this even work?" And then I'll look at it a
little closer (often times using a fair amount of googling myself to
find other similar examples) until I understand the implementation and
form some opinion about it. There are plenty of times that I'll get a
solution handed to me that I think is cleaner, more elegant and
simpler than my own, and so I'll incorporate what I learned into my
future solutions (and let's not forget back into my own work as well,
a topic for another post). And I'll learn something new. And that
makes me happy.

I really like learning new things (thank goodness for that, given how
long I've been in school!), and I have learned _so_ much over the past
couple years that I've been teaching. Possibly more than what I've
learned in all the classes I've taken during my graduate career
(different things for sure, which makes it difficult to compare
amount, but still, you get the idea).

To be sure, there is a balance, and part of my own learning process
has been to find out that sweat spot between unstructured free-style
assignments ("Write a program that does X with input B. Ready go!")
and an enumerated list of steps that will gently guide a traveler from
an empty text file to a working program that meets all the specs. I
think I've been zeroing in on the balance, and the feedback I get from
blogs as well as the assignments themselves is really helpful. So keep
writing, and keep a healthy does of skepticism regarding my
philosophy. And ask questions!

![50 Ways](/assets/posts/50_ways.png)
[50 Ways](http://xkcd.com/118/)
