---
title: Making Space
created_at: Wed, 15 May 2013 22:11:08 +0000
kind: article
published: true
tags:
- community
- illich
- Uncategorized
- virtual space
- vtclis13
---

> How to go about creating a space that facilitates learning? As we
learned from Morningstar and Farmer, there is a danger of
over-designing the space and often the users don't end up using the
space in the way the designer intended. So we shouldn't
over-design. But there should probably be some kind of structure,
right? Or why create the space at all? <cite>my brain</cite>

These are some of the thoughts that were going through my head as I
set out to plan my final project. Throughout the semester a common
focus of mine has been the lack of a space in my own field (Electrical
& Computer Engineering) to facilitate making connections between the
work that goes on in the department, both teaching and research, and
the outside world.

<!-- more -->

I also became interested in many of the ideas Ivan Illich presented in
[chapter 6](http://deschoolingsociety.digress.it/learning-webs/) of
"[Descooling
Society](http://deschoolingsociety.digress.it/)". Specifically, how
would we go about creating a network to facilitate skill exchange and
peer matching? Once we have a peer-to-peer network of learners, what
role does an "elder" have, and how does one become an elder?

I began by looking at some exiting peer networks and online
communities that I have had either direct or indirect involvement in
to see how they addressed the questions of structure, but in the space
itself, and any imposed structure between peers that imposes some sort
of hierarchy, or the notion of an "elder".

### The Linux Kernel

It has been several decades since Linus Torvalds' [original announcement](https://groups.google.com/forum/?fromgroups=#!msg/comp.os.minix/dlNtH7RRrGA/SwRavCzVE7gJ) of his new operating system:

~~~
 From: torvalds@klaava.Helsinki.FI (Linus Benedict Torvalds) 
Newsgroups: comp.os.minix 
Subject: What would you like to see most in minix? 
Summary: small poll for my new operating system 
Date: 25 Aug 91 20:57:08 GMT 
Organization: University of Helsinki 

Hello everybody out there using minix - 

I'm doing a (free) operating system (just a hobby, won't be big and
professional like gnu) for 386(486) AT clones. This has been brewing
since april, and is starting to get ready. I'd like any feedback on
things people like/dislike in minix, as my OS resembles it somewhat
(same physical layout of the file-system (due to practical reasons)
among other things).

~~~ 
{: .text}

since that time the [Linux kernel](https://www.kernel.org/) project
has grown to be the largest collaborative endeavor in the history of
computing. According to one measure, there were 1,316 developers
involved with the version 3.2 release, each contributing an average of
10,935 lines of code to the project. The clip found on the
linxfoundation's website summarizes how this tremendous feat is
possible:

http://youtu.be/yVpbFMhOAwE?t=1m43s 

There is a fairly simple and effective hierarchy in place: individual
developers submit patches to senior kernel developer who in turn
review and sign off on patches before sending onward to Linus Torvalds
for final approval. This is the most dictatorship-like model of any of
the networks I looked at, but I think it makes a lot of sense. The
stability and usefulness of the Linux kernel depends on all 15 million
lines of code working well with one another, a more ad-hoc "allow
everyone to contribute, fix errors later" method such as the one
embodied by [wikipedia](http://www.wikipedia.org) probably wouldn't be
effective for this project. It's worth noting that the rather strict
structure doesn't prevent people from maintaining and contributing to
forks of the kernel other than the one maintained by Torvalds. In
fact, [up until
recently](http://www.zdnet.com/blog/open-source/android-and-linux-re-merge-into-one-operating-system/10625),
[Google maintained its own
fork](http://www.zdnet.com/blog/open-source/linus-torvalds-on-android-the-linux-fork/9426)
of the kernel for it's Android operating system.

### github.com

The versioning control tool git was created by the Linux development
community in response to changes in the relationship between the open
source community and the company responsible for BitKeeper, the
versioning control system used up until 2005, much like they would on
other social networking sites, but rather than posts about current
gastronomic adventures, GitHub generates feeds of updates and changes
made to various software projects.

There isn't really a notion of a uniform social hierarchy, as everyone
is the maintainer of their own project, and may act as contributor to
any other project. Individual projects may be ["trending" or
"featured"](https://github.com/explore) depending on activity.

### stackoverflow.com

Still on the geek theme, stackoverflow is an invaluable resource to
many software developers, novice or advanced. Organized into a
question and answer format, anyone can post a question or an answer
and the site [provides tools](http://stackoverflow.com/about) to
improve the quality of questions and up-vote helpful answers. There is
a notion of currency, called "reputation", that members earn through
participating on the site. Gaining reputation can unlock certain
[privileges](http://stackoverflow.com/privileges) that are not
available to all users. With enough reputation, individuals can be
elevated to [moderator](http://stackoverflow.com/users?tab=moderators)
status, a role I would associate with Illich's notion of an "elder".

### couchsurfing.org

http://www.youtube.com/watch?feature=player\_embedded&v=Lr\_VNUTvOeQ 

Up until this point the sites I've surveyed have been what we would
generally refer to "virtual" spaces. The communities and interactions
exist primarily in
cyberspace. [Couchsurfing](https://www.couchsurfing.org) is a bit
different. At its core it is a network of travelers who open their
homes to other travelers to provide a uniquely personal and rewarding
experience not available from hotels or other travel industry
offerings. It is focused on helping people explore the world by
connecting with other people in a particular geographic area, remote
or local, so many of the interactions take place in the "real"
world. However, a thriving virtual community is also an integral part
of the couchsurfing experience in the form of discussion forums
organized into groups of free formed topics ranging from [geographic
areas](https://www.couchsurfing.org/n/places/blacksburg-virginia-united-states),
to helping each other [learn new
languages](https://www.couchsurfing.org/group.html?gid=21491), to
[everything](https://www.couchsurfing.org/group.html?gid=592)[in](https://www.couchsurfing.org/group.html?gid=2080)[between](https://www.couchsurfing.org/group.html?gid=1302).

One of the first questions asked by couch surfing skeptics is "is it
safe"? There seems to be a common fear among those who do not
couchsurf that most strangers are creeps who would sooner steal your
wallet than let you stay for free on their couch. While most of those
who join couchsurfing do so because they naturally have a more
optimistic view of humanity, safety is [a high
priority](https://www.couchsurfing.org/n/help) and a clear set of
[community guidelines](https://www.couchsurfing.org/n/guidelines) are
published to help ensure everyone has a safe, enjoyable experience.

Most importantly though, is the system of references in place that
enable members to rate the experience they had with other
members. References themselves do not directly lead to any increased
privileges in the community: members are free to use the information
as they see fit. Some opt to only host or otherwise connect with
people who have received a lot of positive references while others
will accept hosts or guests with few or no references. I have never
come across a profile with negative references. I suspect that this is
not because there are no negative experiences (in fact I have heard of
a couple from witnesses), but that people with negative references
don't last long in the community. While there are many people who
would help those new members who do not have any references yet, I
think few would choose to welcome someone who has violated the spirit
of couchsurfing in some way.

Separate but related to the reference system is the
[vouching](https://www.couchsurfing.org/vouch.html) system. This is a
more formalized approach to building trust networks and is a more
integral part of the structure of the site in that being vouched for
can grant certain privileges, namely, the ability to vouch for
others. Unlike references, vouching is intended to ONLY apply to
people who have met face-to-face, though the enforcement of that rule
is left to the community itself.

### illichvillich.net

The greatest challenge I have faced in the creation of a space for
learning has been to identify which aspects of the previously
mentioned successful virtual communities should be integrated, and
how. At its core, the inspiration came from my understanding of the
role [english coffee
houses](http://www.umich.edu/~ece/student_projects/coffee/) played in
the 17th and 18th century. While the idea of gathering around a
particular beverage was not unknown at the time, the precursor to
coffee was ale and along with the switch from a depressant to a
stimulant also came a marked change in the intellectual culture
surrounding these popular gather spots. People from all walks of life
were able to mingle and share ideas and the space became an
intellectual breeding ground separate, but connected with the
universities of the time. I can only imagine that without any set
curriculum the topics of discussion varied greatly with the interest
of the participants and the local events of the time.

It goes without saying then (and yet, here I am, saying it), that
topics must be defined and controlled by the members. But I don't want
to create yet another forum site.

Of the [four
networks](http://deschoolingsociety.digress.it/learning-webs/#24)
defined by Illich to enable his vision of a deschooled society:

  - Reference Services to Educational Objects
  - Skill Exchanges
  - Peer-Matching
  - Reference Services to Educators-at-Large

I was most interested in building a Skill Exchange and Peer-Matching
network. I feel that if I can create a space that is successful in
that goal, the two "Reference Services" networks should follow
organically, as it seems the primary challenge there is collecting the
information, there are already well defined implementations of
"reference services".

On the face of it, implementing a skill exchange and peer-matching
network is just a matter of defining a data structure that can
associate a set of skills with a particular individual and then an
algorithm that will match people who have mutual skill-learning
interests. That's the easy part. The challenge, which was brought up
during the final presentation day, is that most people are probably
not going to want to spend any amount of time entering individual
skills and interests they have and those they want to learn. Ideally
all a user would need to provide are links to existing blogging and
micro-blogging feeds, in which case we would need an algorithm that
would parse content that is already being created by each user to
determine skill sets and interests. This is the challenge, and a
complete lexicographic analysis is well beyond my current knowledge of
algorithm design. What would be relatively straight forward is
grabbing tags from existing structured feeds that provide that
information. It would still depend on self-reporting, but ideally
self-reporting that is already being done anyway.

The real challenge has been to figure out what more to do. What I have
mentioned so far would be useful, but not particularly unique. In
fact, couchsurfing already has a notion of "Learn, Teach, Share" built
into the profiles, though the system doesn't really facilitate
searching for people based on that information. The more I have talked
with Illich enthusiasts, the more it becomes clear that the real
potential lies in creating more of a platform for exploring ideas,
rather than just a repository of information. The last brainstorming
session I had quickly turned from the details of setting up a skill
exchange network to the much more difficult questions of

  - how is a unit of information stored?
  - who decides what a unit of information is?
  - how are individual units of information connected with one another?
  - how does a user effectively navigate a space of interconnected units of information?
  - how does a user track their personal path through a network of information nodes?
  - how does a user share their path through a network of information nodes?
  - who writes the information nodes?
  - should nodes have structural support for quizzes/practice exercises to help learners decide if they have mastered a particular topic well enough to move on to another?

And then implementation details involved with all of those are of
course somewhat overwhelming at this point.

I plan to have another brainstorming session tonight, with a different
group of hackers and see were these ideas lead. In the mean time, I
will continue to get a working implementation of a basic
skill-matching network up at
[illichvillich.net](http://www.illichvillich.net/), just as soon as
I'm finished posting final grades.


