---
title: "New Site, New Framework"
created_at: 2013-05-22 11:42:04 -0400
kind: article
published: true
tags:
 - nanoc
 - wordpress
---

## Goodbye Wordpress

For the past two years I have been using Virginia Tech's
[Blogs@VT](https://blogs.lt.vt.edu/) service to host my blog. It's
been nice and all, but my goal had always been to move away from the
VT hosted option and away from [WordPress](http://www.wordpress.org)
too. It's not that I don't appreciate all that WordPress has done, in
fact, I think it's fine for what it does, and it's open source, which
is nice (and all the more reason
[blogs.lt.vt.edu](https://blogs.lt.vt.edu) really should fix whatever
is making
[this hack](https://blogs.lt.vt.edu/support/2012/11/27/faq-i-cant-access-or-feed-out-my-posts-by-category/)
necessary to get tag feeds), but there were a few things that bugged
me, mostly relating to the...

<!-- more -->

- UI and work-flow. Namely, as a WordPress blogger I was pretty much
  forced to use the WordPress interface for entering content, which is
  kind of crummy if you want to do anything other than add elements
  that had buttons associated with them.  The text mode interface is
  almost not worth the effort, as it seems to allow HTML tags, but
  does some extra parsing that makes it a pain to copy and paste HTML
  generated elsewhere: WordPress seems to replace empty lines with
  `<br/>` tags, which is incredibly annoying when the code you're
  pasting in has been hard-wrapped to 80 columns. Either be a straight
  forward HTML pass through, OR assume some kind of well established
  markup syntax such as
  [Markdown](http://daringfireball.net/projects/markdown/).

- speed. WordPress is a dynamic site generator. The actual data for
  the posts is stored in a database somewhere and HTML pages are
  created on the fly when a visitor requests a particular
  resource. This isn't a major issue with today's internet and
  computer speeds, but for something like a simple blog that serves up
  mostly static content WordPress can feel sluggish at
  times. Especially, I found, when syndicating a lot of feeds, such as
  on a [mother blog](http://blogs.lt.vt.edu/ece2524s13).

- lack of versioning/backup. I was at the mercy of blogs@vt as far as
  backups were concerned, and versioning control is pretty dismal with
  the WordPress interface.


## Hello Nanoc

[Nanoc](http://nanoc.ws) is one of roughly 42 bazillion _static site
generators_. A static site generator works a lot like the software
behind a dynamic site, like WordPress, but instead of doing
the transformation of data to HTML pages on the fly on the server, all
the work is done locally on your own machine. What gets sent to the
server is a set of HTML and CSS files that make up a complete site. 

Nanoc happens to be written in Ruby, which is a language I am
not terribly familiar with, but want to learn, which is one of the
reasons I choose Nanoc over some of the other static site generators.

I can use the same workflow I use for most other text files. I create
content mostly in Markdown using Emacs. This makes it super easy to
include things like source code blocks and equations, things that were
always a bit tricky in WordPress. Since everything is stored as text
files I can use git for version control.

I have more control. There are a ton of decent themes for WordPress,
but tweaking to get things the way you want can be a pain. The
stylesheets tend to be big and complex, and finding just the right
place to change can be difficult when you don't know what you're
looking for and there seem to be 10 times the necessary structural
elements.

## Challenges

As I mentioned, /most/ content on a blog is static, and so it makes
sense to serve it up as static pages. As with all things in life,
there are some exceptions, notably commenting systems. The real-time
comments you see on WordPress and the like are dynamic features and
implementing these with a static site generator can be a challenge. I
had originally planned on going with a popular 3rd party service
Disqus, but after reading a strong argument against Disqus on grounds
of it not being open source I wavored. I'm not sure how much of an
open source fundamentalist I want to be yet. Generally I'd like to
adopt a more pragmatic philosophy and use non-free-as-in-speech
software if it gets the job done better than free alternatives. But
comments are a little special, because there's the other issue of data
privacy. Of course, the comments themselves will be made public, but
there are other pieces of data associated with a comment, such as
email and IP addresses, that would warrent a good read of Disqus's (or
whatever other social commenting service I'd consider) privacy policy.

It turns out that there IS an open-source alternative called juvia. I
haven't taken too much of a look at it but it seems to have all the
important bits in place. Since it is just the code, I'd have to set up
my own server to run the service itself, so integrating the comments
with my static blog would be similar to the process with Disqus and
make use of some JavaScript magic.
