---
title: More Motivation to Learn to Learn
published: true
kind: article
created_at: '2013-12-04 23:00:00 -0500'
author_name: hazybluedot
tags: jobs, technology, learning, education
---

It shouldn't come as a surprise to anyone who keeps up to date on
technology trends that
[Amazon](http://www.cbsnews.com/news/amazons-jeff-bezos-looks-to-the-future/),
[UPS and FedEx](http://www.theverge.com/2013/12/3/5169878/ups-is-researching-its-own-delivery-drones-to-compete-with-amazons)
have all started thinking about or even experimenting with the idea of
using unmanned drones for parcel delivery.  Of course, a future of
automated drones flying around delivering all our material desires in
30 minutes or less is still a long way off, both for technological and
legal reasons.  Mark my words though: In our profit driven, capitalist
economy anything that CAN be automated WILL be
automated[^automating_food_service], eliminating a potential job for a
human.

<!-- more -->

Cue yet another public outrage about the evils of technology
destroying jobs. It's certainly true, technology will continue to
eliminate jobs that can be automated, and the more technological
advances we make we will progressively be able to automate more and
more complex tasks. If we stop right there it looks like we're on a
swift path to the quasi-distopian future depicted in Wall-e in which
we are all overweight, confined to our hovering lough chairs and
forget how to interact with each other or grow our own food, or the
more definitely-distopian future depicted in
[Elysium](http://www.imdb.com/title/tt1535108/) where the
super-wealthy live in a paradise space station while the poor struggle
to survive on an overpopulated planet.  Which of the two we're headed
two will depend on whether or not we make some pretty big changes to
our profit-driven economy/values and whether or not these are our only
two options will changes we do or don't make in the way we think about
education.

If nothing about our education system changes, then yes, the future
job market is looking pretty bleak. Who wants to spend 4+ years
training for a career when in 4+ years all those skills will be
obsolete since a robot will be performing them faster with more
accuracy than any human could?

The problem here isn't technology but the words "training" and
"skills" and how they shape the way we think about and implement our
educational institutions. With sky-rocketing tuition costs and our
broken value system that dangerously makes "employable" synonymous
with "valid human being" it's no wonder that the focus of education
has been narrowing down to "career training". That's not the purpose
of education though, and
[Eleanor Roosevelt](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Eleanor_Roosevelt),
as one example,
[knew this in 1930](http://www.gwu.edu/~erpapers/documents/articles/goodcitizenship.cfm).

I would expand on the former First Lady's vision on the purpose of
education to include, in addition to producing citizens, producing
learners, thinkers, visionaries and tinkerers who will be able to
collectively solve some of the big problems we'll be facing in the
future, like global warming, water scarcity, loss of agricultural land
while a growing need for food, etc.

The cognitive skills needed to assemble a widget are not the same as
needed to solve, say, world poverty.

What can we do to make this shift happen? Is it something that will
require a huge synchronized effort across all tiers of administration
or are there changes individual educators can make to reverse some of
drift we've seen away from the core purpose of education?

What *is* the purpose of an education?

![](http://i.imgur.com/SSwNEO0.jpg)

## Footnotes

[^automating_food_service]: I recently had a conversation with a friend about the likelihood of the automation of various parts of the food service industry as a possible example of an area where customer demand for human interaction may slow or prevent the introduction of robotic servers once they become technologically viable. When the time comes, it will be interesting to see the creative ways the marketing departments come up with to convince us we're better off withought dealing with pesky humans when being served our food.
